Server 10.13 Release Notes (#4864)
owncloud/docs: modules/ROOT/pages/server_release_notes.adoc

:page-aliases: {latest-server-version}@server:admin_manual:whats_new_admin.adoc, \
{latest-server-version}@server:ROOT:server_release_notes.adoc

> * xref:changes-in-10-12-2[Changes in 10.13.0]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:changes-in-10-13-0[Changes in 10.13.0]
```

* xref:changes-in-8-0[Changes in 8.0]
* xref:changes-in-7-0[Changes in 7.0]

== Changes in 10.13.0

Dear ownCloud administrator, find below the changes and known issues in ownCloud Server 10.13.0 that need your attention. You can also read the {oc-changelog-url}[full ownCloud Server changelog] for further details on what has changed.

=== Update Symfony from 4.4.* to 5.4.*

Symfony framework has been updated to LTS major version 5.4. This also affected a number of apps which required a new release and have been now included in the complete bundle.

> === Drop setup of User Key encryption

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Drop Setup of User Key Encryption
```

> User Key encryption has been already deprecated in core versions later than 10.7. For this reason, the command line interface and web UI to enable User Key encryption is no longer available. If you are operating an ownCloud installation with User Key encryption enabled, please get in contact with support@owncloud.com to plan a migration to Master Key encryption. https://github.com/owncloud/encryption/pull/389[encryption#389]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User key encryption has been already deprecated in core versions later than 10.7. For this reason, the command line interface and web UI to enable user key encryption is no longer available. If you are operating an ownCloud installation with user key encryption enabled, please get in contact with support@owncloud.com to plan a migration to master key encryption. https://github.com/owncloud/encryption/pull/389[encryption#389]
```

> === User Key encryption is no longer auto-enabled

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== User Key Encryption Is No Longer Auto-Enabled
```

> Executing the "encryption:encrypt-all" occ command will no longer auto-enable User Key encryption. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40702[#40702]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Executing the "encryption:encrypt-all" occ command will no longer auto-enable user key encryption. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40702[#40702]
```

=== Added occ command to remove obsolete storages

> Metadata coming from storages are stored in the DB. Previously, when a storage has been removed from ownCloud that metadata remained in the DB. The new occ command allows removing that stored metadata, reducing the amount of space used by the DB as well as slightly improving the performance since there will be less entries. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40779[#40779]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metadata coming from storages are stored in the database. Previously, when a storage has been removed from ownCloud, metadata remained in the DB. The new occ command allows removing that stored metadata, reducing the amount of space used by the DB as well as slightly improving the performance since there will be less entries. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40779[#40779]
```

> Metadata coming from storages are stored in the DB. Previously, when a storage has been removed from ownCloud that metadata remained in the DB. The new occ command allows to remove that metadata stored, reducing the amount of space used by the DB as well as slightly improving the performance since there will be less entries. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40779[#40779]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metadata coming from storages are stored in the DB. Previously, when a storage has been removed from ownCloud that metadata remained in the DB. The new occ command allows removing that stored metadata, reducing the amount of space used by the DB as well as slightly improving the performance since there will be less entries. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40779[#40779]
```

> === Enforce 2-factor authentication

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Enforce 2-Factor Authentication
```

> 2-factor authentication can be enforced now. The feature requires at least an app implementing the 2-factor, otherwise no enforcement will be done. If the 2-factor authentication is enforced, all users will be required to use a 2-factor authentication app. Some specific groups selected by the admin can be excluded to let those users bypass the 2-factor authentication. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40830[#40830]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2-factor authentication can be enforced now. The feature requires at least one app implementing the 2-factor, otherwise no enforcement will be done. If the 2-factor authentication is enforced, all users will be required to use a 2-factor authentication app. Some specific groups selected by the admin can be excluded to let those users bypass the 2-factor authentication. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40830[#40830]
```

> 2-factor authentication can be enforced now. The feature requires at least one app implementing the 2-factor, otherwise no enforcement will be done. If the 2-factor authentication is enforced, all users will be required to use a 2-factor authentication app. Some specific groups selected by the admin can be excluded to let those users bypass the 2-factor authentication. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40830[#40830]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2-factor authentication can be enforced now. The feature requires at least one app implementing the 2-factor authentication, otherwise no enforcement will be done. If the 2-factor authentication is enforced, all users will be required to use a 2-factor authentication app. Some specific groups selected by the admin can be excluded to let those users bypass the 2-factor authentication. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40830[#40830]
```

> === Setting up federation sharing over the WebUI is again possible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Setting up Federation Sharing over the Web UI Is Again Possible
```

> After an update of the guzzle library in previous core versions, it was no longer possible to set up federation sharing over the WebUI because of the wrong format used during the token exchange phase. We now explicitly set the format to be json so that the exchange is correctly done. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40815[#40815]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After an update of the guzzle library in previous core versions, it was no longer possible to set up federation sharing over the Web UI because of the wrong format used during the token exchange phase. We now explicitly set the format to be json so that the exchange is correctly done. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40815[#40815]
```

> === Add commands to handle the trusted servers from command line

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Add Commands to Handle Trusted Servers from the Command Line
```

> After update of guzzle, it was no longer possible to request format of response to be json when adding in query parameter with the consequence that setting up federation sharing over the WebUI was not possible. One of the "OCSAuthAPIController" federated instances was receiving requests without a hint that JSON needs to be used, and returned XML. On the other hand, "OCSAuthAPIController" expects only JSON for exchange, and thus failed to parse the message. Now the exchange is correctly done. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40815[#40815]

Reviewer: This has a lot of technical detail. Maybe these higher level release notes do not need that much "gory" technical explanation.

Author: adjusted

> New occ commands have been added to handle the trusted servers for federation from command line. These commands will allow the admin to add, list and remove trusted servers. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40796[#40796]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New occ commands have been added to handle the trusted servers for federation from the command line. These commands will allow the admin to add, list and remove trusted servers. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40796[#40796]
```

> === Skip share_folder for guest users

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Skip share_folder for Guest Users
```

> New occ commands have been added to handle the trusted servers for federation from command line. These commands will allow the admin to add list and remove trusted servers. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40796[#40796]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New occ commands have been added to handle the trusted servers for federation from command line. These commands will allow the admin to add, list and remove trusted servers. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40796[#40796]
```

> When the "share_folder" config.php option was set, guest users could not see anymore their received shares. We now skip the "share_folder" config.php option for guest users and default to root. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40864[#40864]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the "share_folder" config.php option was set, guest users could not longer see their received shares. We now skip the "share_folder" config.php option for guest users and default to root. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40864[#40864]
```

> === Bump files app version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Bump Files App Version
```

> In https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40378 we have fixed the case of (not) moving the share target when the backend storage becomes temporary unavailable but we had the collateral effect that guests did not see anymore their received shares as we were forcing the creation of the target which failed for them as their storage is read-only. We now skip the share_folder config.php option for guests and default to root. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40864[#40864]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40378 we have fixed the case of (not) moving the share target when the backend storage becomes temporarily unavailable but we had the collateral effect that guests did not see their received shares any more as we were forcing the creation of the target which failed for them as their storage is read-only. We now skip the share_folder config.php option for guests and default to root. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40864[#40864]
```

Maybe this also has too much detail for these kind of release notes?

Author: adjusted

Files app version was not properly increased when the "OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\CleanupPersistentFileLock" and "OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\PreviewCleanupJob" background jobs were originally added. As a result, those two jobs were not correctly inserted into the "oc_jobs" table upon a core upgrade. First time installations are not affected as their jobs are correctly added. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40878[#40878]

> === Explicitly set open mode in the checksum wrapper

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Explicitly Set Open Mode in the Checksum Wrapper
```

> Files app version was not properly increased when the "OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\CleanupPersistentFileLock" and "OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\PreviewCleanupJob" background jobs were originally added. As a result, those two jobs were not correctly inserted into the "oc_jobs" table upon a core upgrade. First time installations are not affected as there jobs are correctly added. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40878[#40878]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Files app version was not properly increased when the "OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\CleanupPersistentFileLock" and "OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\PreviewCleanupJob" background jobs were originally added. As a result, those two jobs were not correctly inserted into the "oc_jobs" table upon a core upgrade. First time installations are not affected as their jobs are correctly added. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40878[#40878]
```

> Uploading files to some external storages through the desktop client was causing issues due to the checksum wrapper. We are using additional wrappers and the mode wasn't being detected correctly in some cases. Using the right mode in the checksum wrapper was required in order to decide whether we should have discarded the final checksum or not; in this case, the checksum was being discarded so it was causing a checksum mismatch. Now the open mode in the checksum wrapper is set explicitly. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40832[#40832]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Uploading files to some external storages via the desktop client was causing issues due to the checksum wrapper. We are using additional wrappers and the mode wasn't being detected correctly in some cases. Using the right mode in the checksum wrapper was required in order to decide whether we should have discarded the final checksum or not; in this case, the checksum was being discarded so it was causing a checksum mismatch. Now the open mode in the checksum wrapper is set explicitly. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40832[#40832]
```

> === Align to new accounts.google.com authorization URI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Align to New accounts.google.com Authorization URI
```

Core 10.12.1 brought an update of the google/apiclient from version 2.12.6 to 2.13.1. However, in version 2.13.0 the accounts.google.com authorization URI has been updated. This change broke old code that uses the "setApprovalPrompt('force')" instead of the newer "setPrompt('consent')" method, as this endpoint does not support the legacy approval prompt parameter. This has been now fixed. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40783[#40783]

> === Fix query used to delete thumbnails

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Fix for Query Unnecessarily Deleting Thumbnails
```

Fixed query that detects unused thumbnails to prevent unnecessary deletes and potential recreations. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40801[#40801]

> === Automatically disable online updater for enterprise

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Automatically Disable Online Updater for Enterprise
```

Online updater is not recommended for Enterprise installations and is now automatically disabled in such cases. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40841[#40841]

> === Versions expire job does not error anymore with federated shares

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Versions Expire Job No Longer Reports an Error with Federated Shares
```

> The versions expire job does not error anymore with federated shares when versioning metadata is enabled. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40847[#40847]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The versions expire job does not report errors anymore with federated shares when versioning metadata is enabled. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40847[#40847]
```

> === Versions expire job does not anymore error with federated shares

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Versions expire job does not error anymore with federated shares
```

=== Notable Changes

> * Setup checks now allow other values other than "none" for X-Robots-Tag header. If "none" or "noindex" and "nofollow" are missing, a security warning is raised. Previously a header value with "noindex" and "nofollow" wasn't allowed even though it was valid. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40715[#40715]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Setup checks now allow values other than "none" for X-Robots-Tag header. If "none" or "noindex" and "nofollow" are missing, a security warning is raised. Previously a header value with "noindex" and "nofollow" wasn't allowed even though it was valid. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40715[#40715]
```

> Versions expire job does not anymore error with federated shares when versioning metadata is enabled. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40847[#40847]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The versions expire job does not error anymore with federated shares when versioning metadata is enabled. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40847[#40847]
```

* The Last Login column on the Users page is now correctly hidden if the setting is initially unchecked. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40771[#40771]
* User input is validated now in UserController. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40769[#40769]
* A system tag with a too long name resulted in potentially inaccessible data. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40804[#40804]
* A federated share with a too long name resulted in inaccessible data. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40726[#40726]
* Due to Apache rewrite rules originally not existing headers could hold an empty string. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40856[#40856]
* Verbose command output of "background:queue:execute" is now displayed. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40844[#40844]

> * There have been rare cases where deleting a file from a Google Drive mount could have thrown an undefined variable error. Though the process completed without further issues, no errors should have been thrown. This fix initializes the variables for these cases properly making the error go away. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40822[#40822]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* There have been rare cases where deleting a file from a Google Drive mount could have thrown an undefined variable error. Since the process completed without further issues, no errors should have been thrown. This fix initializes the variables for these cases properly, making the error go away. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40822[#40822]
```

* xref:changes-in-7-0[Changes in 7.0]

== Changes in 10.13.0

Dear ownCloud administrator, find below the changes and known issues in ownCloud Server 10.13.0 that need your attention. You can also read the {oc-changelog-url}[full ownCloud Server changelog] for further details on what has changed.

=== Update Symfony from 4.4.* to 5.4.*

Symfony framework has been updated to LTS major version 5.4. This also affected a number of apps which required a new release and have been now included in the complete bundle.

=== Drop Setup of User Key Encryption

User key encryption has been already deprecated in core versions later than 10.7. For this reason, the command line interface and web UI to enable user key encryption is no longer available. If you are operating an ownCloud installation with user key encryption enabled, please get in contact with support@owncloud.com to plan a migration to master key encryption. https://github.com/owncloud/encryption/pull/389[encryption#389]

=== User Key Encryption Is No Longer Auto-Enabled

Executing the `encryption:encrypt-all` occ command will no longer auto-enable user key encryption. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40702[#40702]

> === Added occ command to remove obsolete storages

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Added occ Command to Remove Obsolete Storages
```

Metadata coming from storages are stored in the database. Previously, when a storage has been removed from ownCloud, metadata remained in the DB. The new occ command allows removing that stored metadata, reducing the amount of space used by the DB as well as slightly improving the performance since there will be less entries. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40779[#40779]

=== Enforce 2-Factor Authentication

> 2-factor authentication can be enforced now. The feature requires at least one app implementing the 2-factor authentication, otherwise no enforcement will be done. If the 2-factor authentication is enforced, all users will be required to use a 2-factor authentication app. Some specific groups selected by the admin can be excluded to let those users bypass the 2-factor authentication. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40830[#40830]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2-factor authentication can be enforced now. The feature requires at least one app implementing 2-factor authentication, otherwise no enforcement will be done. If 2-factor authentication is enforced, all users will be required to use a 2-factor authentication app. Some specific groups selected by the admin can be excluded to let those users bypass 2-factor authentication. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40830[#40830]
```

IMO "2-factor authentication" doesn't need "the" in front of it.

=== Add Commands to Handle Trusted Servers from the Command Line

New occ commands have been added to handle the trusted servers for federation from the command line. These commands will allow the admin to add, list and remove trusted servers. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40796[#40796]

=== Implement App Registry

By using a new option `Open in..` in the iOS (version 12.0.3+) or Desktop client (version 4.0+) it is now possible to directly open a file in the Office Suite being installed on the ownCloud server. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40843[#40843]    

=== Skip `share_folder` for Guest Users

When the `share_folder` config.php option was set, guest users could not longer see their received shares. We now skip the `share_folder` config.php option for guest users and default to root. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40864[#40864]

> === Apply same restrictions for all the shares

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Apply Same Restrictions for All the Shares
```

Remote shares will have the same restrictions as user and group shares. This means that, in order for a remote user to show up as sharee, the search term length must be greater than the minimum configured otherwise only exact matches will be shown. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40885[#40885]

> === Clean up storage and database after failed file uploads

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Clean up Storage and Database After Failed File Uploads
```

> === Clean up storage and database after failed files uploads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Clean up storage and database after failed file uploads
```

> Storage and database are now cleaned up of any remaining items in case a files upload fails. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40892[#40892]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Storage and database are now cleaned up of any remaining items if a file upload fails. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40892[#40892]
```

=== Bump Files App Version

> Files app version was not properly increased when the `OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\CleanupPersistentFileLock` and `OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\PreviewCleanupJob` background jobs were originally added. As a result, those two jobs were not correctly inserted into the `oc_jobs` table upon a core upgrade. First time installations are not affected as their jobs are correctly added. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40878[#40878]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The files app version was not properly increased when the `OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\CleanupPersistentFileLock` and `OCA\Files\BackgroundJob\PreviewCleanupJob` background jobs were originally added. As a result, those two jobs were not correctly inserted into the `oc_jobs` table upon a core upgrade. First time installations are not affected as their jobs are correctly added. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40878[#40878]
```

=== Fix for Query Unnecessarily Deleting Thumbnails

Fixed query that detects unused thumbnails to prevent unnecessary deletes and potential recreations. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40801[#40801]

=== Automatically Disable Online Updater for Enterprise

Online updater is not recommended for Enterprise installations and is now automatically disabled in such cases. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40841[#40841]

=== Versions Expire Job No Longer Reports an Error with Federated Shares

The versions expire job does not report errors anymore with federated shares when versioning metadata is enabled. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40847[#40847]

=== Display and delete invalid background jobs

Background jobs can be no longer valid because they are from an old version of an app, or from an app that has been disabled. These jobs can now be listed with the command `occ background:queue:status --display-invalid-jobs` and can be deleted with the command `occ background:queue:delete <Job ID>`. https://github.com/owncloud/core/pull/40846[#40846]

> === Rely on server to sort the user list

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Rely on Server to Sort the User List
```
